---
title: August Week 2
date: 2025-08-10
layout: learnlog
---

<h1 class="text-4xl md:text-4xl lg:text-4xl font-extrabold">
  System Design
</h1>
<h1 class="text-2xl md:text-2xl lg:text-2xl font-extrabold">
Numbers Every Developer Should Know
</h1>
<p>
Latency figures, availability numbers and powers of 2 are three fundamental topics that a system design engineer should know off the top of their head. These numbers help developers make rough estimates of a systems scale. Understanding a systems scale is an important factor to consider for its design. Alex Xu's System Design Interview book, gave a list of these numbers and I added them into Anki for regular revision.
</p>

<div>
    <h1 class="text-2xl md:text-2xl lg:text-2xl font-extrabold">
        Data Models
    </h1>
    <p>
        There are several data models that might be considered for a system, but the two most common ones are Relational Model and Document Model. 
    </p>
    <p>
        Relational databases model data in the form of tables that have rows and columns. Relational databases have a strict schema and follow schema on write principle. Examples of relational databases include PostgreSQL, MySQL, etc.
    </p>
    <p>
        Document models on the other hand are more schemaless. They also follow a schema on read principle. This model is useful when you have data this unstructured or that has a changing structure. 
    </p>
    <p>
        A blog post is a good example of data that would be suited for a document model. Different blog posts have different sections, each of which contain different elements such as headers, paragraphs and images. Representing these in a relational database is very difficult. 
    </p>
    <p>
        Another factor to consider in choosing a data model is data locality. In relational databases, data is normalized. Related data is stored on a separate table and the relation is shown with a foreign key. 
        Let's say we are storing users and their configuration data. Best practices for relational database design would suggest that the user table and configuration table should be separate and related via an id (commonly the `user_id`). When the configuration for a user needs to be fetched, a join has to be made.
        However when we use the document model, we can simple store the configuration data inside the user data. 
    </p>

    <pre markdown="1">
```json
{
    "user_id": 1,
    "user_name": "Meow",
    "user_configuration": {
        "theme": "dark"
    }
}
```
    </pre>

</div>
